---
title: "Code Book for Getting and Cleaning Data course project"
author: "Frida Nellros"
date: '2015-03-21'
output: html_document
---

# Code Book for Getting and Cleaning Data course project

This repository contains the required scripts to achieve creation of a processed
tidy data set from raw data collected from the accelerometer and gyrometer of 
the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone [1]. 

The activity is a part of a course in "Getting and Cleaning Data", and the
assignment is to: 

1. Merge the training and the test sets to create one data set.
2. Extract only the estimated on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement variable.
3. Use descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set.
4. Appropriately label the data set with descriptive variable names. 
5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.

## Data origin

The original data set contains various accelerometer measurements from 30 
different subjects (i.e. persons) performing six different activities (WALKING, 
WALKING UPSTAIRS, WALKING DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING and LAYING) recorded at 
several occasions. 

## Data manipulation

The result generated by the run_analysis.R script only contain the mean and 
standard deviation accelerometer data (in all coordinate directions), averaged 
per subject and activity. Thus presenting one mean value of the recorded 
standard  deviations and means of each variable per subject and activity, making 
in total 180 observations.

### Manipulation steps

1. Read activity (y), feature vector (X) and subject (subject) from the test and training data
2. Concatenate these row-wise for corresponding test-training
3. Locate column indices for variables containing mean() and std() in their names (according to assignment) by analysing meta data in features.txt
4. Select only these relvant variables from concatenated feature vector data and mege with subject and activity data into one data frame
5. Re-label the activites with corresponding strings from activity_labels.txt
6. Set column names from variables names, remove unacceptable characters
7. Group by activity and subject and apply averaging
8. Write output into .txt-file

## Variables in resulting data set 

### Averaging descriptors
The two variables for which the below features have been averaged over:
- subject
- activity

### Features

The features are named in accordance with the original data set, but with some
modifications (removing (,) and -):

<feautre>-<mean/std><possibly X,Y or Z if coordinate specific>

#### Original features description

(the following is copied from the description in features_info.txt describing the original data [1])

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

- tBodyAcc-XYZ
- tGravityAcc-XYZ
- tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
- tBodyGyro-XYZ
- tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
- tBodyAccMag
- tGravityAccMag
- tBodyAccJerkMag
- tBodyGyroMag
- tBodyGyroJerkMag
- fBodyAcc-XYZ
- fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
- fBodyGyro-XYZ
- fBodyAccMag
- fBodyAccJerkMag
- fBodyGyroMag
- fBodyGyroJerkMag

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

- mean(): Mean value
- std(): Standard deviation

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:

- gravityMean
- tBodyAccMean
- tBodyAccJerkMean
- tBodyGyroMean
- tBodyGyroJerkMean

## References
[1 http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones]( http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones )

